for coming today. Um my name is Ree. I'm a PhD student at Carnegie Melon uh with Aron NaBi who's here with us and Zach Petco who is not here with us. Um and today I'm just going to talk about sort of the ingredients I think are are necessary for building a computational theory of animal autonomy. And uh to do that we're going to be presenting some specific work on doing this in in zebra fish. So uh a sparse outline of this talk um I just just motivate you know why we use top- down models in neuroscience. So why is this our modeling approach um and then talk about the characteristics of autonomy in animals versus how we think about autonomy in machines? Um, and then I'm going to present a model of autonomy and zebra fish to to demonstrate some of this and use that model to sort of point towards an outlook on on what what these components are are uh used for in neuroscience and I for building these kinds of uh systems in the future. So um why top down models in neuroscience? I'm sure all of you have have probably seen this quote you know given the research in your lab. Nothing in biology makes sense except in light of evolution. Um really what this what this is trying to say is that you know you know biological systems have these great immense diversity across different temporal and spatial scales. And if you want to make sense of you know intelligence or the cool things about biology that that inspire us in science rather than trying to build you know bottomup models that you know model specific mechanisms at these different spatial and temporal scales. um why not start by answering the big question of what is you know maybe these systems evolved to do you know what are the goals that that um these systems would be naturally selected for. So for for us that means you know just recognizing that organisms they develop in an ecological niche um that provides affordances to the to the agent. So um its environment and its embodiment determine basically how this organism will develop over the course of its evolutionary history and also the course of its individual lifetime. by affordances all I mean is that you know um this environment it determines what sorts of sensory data is available to be perceived by the agent right so depending whether you're like a deep water ocean creature that determines how much light and nutrients you have with if you're a land creature right all these things determine this the set of possible inputs that the the agent can evolve to perceive and sense and then the embodiment itself determines how the agent actually interacts with the environment right so depending on you know whether you're whether you're a fish, right, or or a human, it really determines the nature of how you can affect cause in your environment, how you can manipulate things, explore, all those kinds of things. Um, and all all of those things together determine what behavior you end up uh doing. And so these kinds of components nicely um mirror in biology the exact same ingredients that we think of in machine learning when we design uh define a machine learning problem. So in machine learning right what it means to define a problem to say okay I want my model to execute some behavior right and we do that by specifying a loss function that mathematizes uh some behavior that we want such that optimizing that loss function corresponds to that behavior and we do that given a certain architecture that determines how information flows through our model and of course those things operate on a specific set of inputs as well as you know need to to be updated according to some learning rule and these four components of a machine learning system or exactly the same components that are kind of determined by uh an animal's goal- driven sort of evolution um and the process of natural selection. So for us we're interested in you know giving the scaffolding you know if you have the basic components of an organism so like an embodiment um how do you actually interact with the environment a plastic nervous system so you know how does information propagate through your your brain and and is it is it um modular can it can it be learned on um and an environment that provides the actual input stream. Um what is what sets of these four components produce behavior. How do you organize these things to actually get intelligent behavior? Um, so the first reason, so why top down models are useful for this is to answer the the big why questions in neuroscience, right? If you start with bottom-up models, you're not necessarily guarante. Um, the second reason I think top down models are important has to do with the way that we recognize intelligence in other systems to begin with. So one way to see this if you just look at the history of of in computer science of the ways that we uh set goals for ourselves in terms of what it means to to write a program that can mimic you know or actually be cognitive. Um it started with you know the original imitation game by Alan Turing in the 1950s and this was of course trying to say what what would it take for a machine to think and and where thinking here was defined in terms of language. Can it use and operate in the same symbolic space that humans do? So not symbolic reasoning but just just symbolic in terms of of language and grammar and this was the original turning test. Um but of course this didn't capture everything that we know to be intelligent about humans and animals. And so later on it was proposed by Steven Harnado maybe like we should expand this. Of course the original touring test wasn't meant to just be language that was just an example. And one simple way is just extending it to sensory motor intelligence, right? Humans and animals, the ways they we we often prescribe intelligence, how they interact with their environment. It's if it's intelligible by us. And so we could call this the embodied turning test. Can we implant programs on robots that actually interact in a way that's indistinguishable from humans and animals? Um, and you can further uh impose even more constraints, right, up to arbitrary specificity. But one that's pretty reasonable is saying, okay, not only do I want, you know, um, behavioral outputs to match to be indistinguishable between what we know um, intelligence looks like in in humans and animals, but I want some of the implementation details to line up too. So you might add on internal macro function here and say models of the brain that that behave like brains do should also implement computations in the way that that you know when you squint at it or look at it coarsely implement computations the way brains do too. And the common theme with all of these is that all of these tests, right, we're testing it in a in a space that humans are really good at recognizing intelligence in. Basically, like if you have language, right, this is a very human property. Even physical embodiment, this is, you know, all of our embodiment, we we exist in uh sort of the Newtonian physics realms. And it's really easy to attribute intelligence to just anything that moves and looks like us. Basically, if if it walks like a duck and talks like a duck, it's pretty much a duck. And it's really easy for humans to be tricked, I think. Um, and well, it might not be a trick, but that's the point is to to uh investigate this. Um, and so what's convenient about top- down models then is to even define uh a top- down model and define success of a top- down model. Uh, it requires defining the behavior, right? It's only a top down model is only successful if it if it uh meets the the behavioral output as a preliminary. And that means that you know taologically a top- down model will automatically pass whatever test of intelligence you want it to is because that's part of defining the problem of a top- down model. So we're guaranteed that the models are intelligible by humans in the sense that if if we set out to uh impose physical intelligence or or uh uh language or something like that as a part of our top down model that's already the the baseline deserata of the model. And so unlike uh top a bottom up model, right, if you're interested in things like language, um you're not guaranteed to ever actually produce the output by modeling each of its individual components. So the the second reason we appeal to these is because they're they're kind of automatically intelligible. But top down models are are great. Um and usually we apply them to to things that have goals, right? When goals are easily understood. Um and in in neuroscience, you know, this this is how we reduce the problem space, right? we design a task, you know, that that gets at some aspect of intelligent behavior. Um, and uh that's how we we interrogate the system. But intelligence in animals, right, is is much broader than just goal- driven behavior, at least how how goals are normally thought about, right? So, if we look at this video of this kid, you know, just rolling around on the floor, it's not clear at all like what it's what what this is for, right? You can say it's curiosity or maybe it's to to learn something about the environment, right? But it's really hard to actually instantiate that as a model. um and define things rigorously to to achieve a behavior like this. Um a monkey for example on the right here, this is a picture of a monkey building and using a spear to hunt. For a long time, humans were thought as the sort of uh only uh really sophisticated tool users in the sense that we would use tools to even hunt and accomplish tasks beyond our immediate uh means. For generations, monkeys, you know, and primates um this is a chimpanzeee here had hunted without tools. But you know like two decades ago um you know you can build spears and so what motivates you to suddenly pick up a new skill like that when for generations you were not doing that. Um and on on a final example right certain intellectual pursuits um like mathematics it's not clear at all what type of motivation or goal- driven behavior this like optimizing would produce something like that. So this is like you know Gregori Pelman who who solved the one of the Millennium Prize problems and it's just really the the the real interesting part of I think animal intelligence is not specific goal driven behaviors are easily par parameterizable. It's these uh intellectual pursuits or closing information gaps or just pure exploration and play that really set us apart from from other species or other examples of intelligence. And so the reason all these things are so hard, right? It's kind of like what I said before, it's it's just not clear what the motivation or goal is for, you know, this kid rolling around the room, you know, which means it's really hard to computationally formalize. And even if you have a model of this, it's not clear how you even measure success, right? Success measured when you solve a millennium prize problem or is it measured if you, you know, move around the room as much as this baby does? If that's the notion of success, clearly that's not capturing our intuition about what this intelligent, you know, baby is doing by exploring it. And so it it can be hard to to to find metrics here. And obviously because of this, neuroscience has largely ignored task independent behavior or autonomous behavior because it's really hard to to design experiments around that. But the bigger problem is that intelligence is too often attributed just when the goals are easily identifiable, right? Usually the way that we we prescribe our values onto a system is just those values immediately align with ours. If we can identify the goal like in neuroscience we use foraging tasks or things like that. It's really easy to understand and an anthropomorphize that oh that you know the agent needs to acquire food and that's why we can you know design a learning task. But lots of goals like like the goal of this this sort of curiosity in this room are really interesting and I think are what defined uh set this kind of intelligence apart. So in contrast in in computer science they're also interested in this question but not for you know necessarily defining uh intelligent agents like intelligent humans but just for solving what's what's known as exploration problem reinforcement learning. So in in classical reinforcement learning um you try to learn a task with some extrinsic reward but for lots of complex environments it's really hard to define a reward function and sometimes that reward function might be sparse or it just might not be present to begin with. So the motivating question in exploration is you know how do you you know define a function that you can optimize for in an environment without any reward. So how do you get behavior without a task? Um and one way to do this was inspired by curiosity in in humans and saying okay one one way of instantiating curiosity as a model is maybe saying it has a it's a predictive model. So let's define some uh predictive model omega here that's just for simplicity going a normal distribution that just does one step forward dynamics prediction. So you're in an environment, you take a state, and then you take an action from that state. Um, and that moves you to this s prime here. And for simplicity here, we're just learning the mean, and it's a fixed variance. Um, and so given this predictive model, this onestep predictive model, you can define a bunch of different types of curiosity or intrinsic motivation. So the most common type is called surprise. Um, and what it is is literally Shannon surprise with this foreign model. So what you're doing is you're you're taking this predictive model and the more surprising your predictions are meaning the more um unlikely that probability was from the true uh whatever sample you did from your from your learn distribution from the true state um the more rewarding it is. So it's a measure of novelty um which encourages the agent if you reward states that have high prediction error encourages agent to to visit out states with that prediction error until it learns on that right so that it can reduce its prediction error. So things that are hard to predict are good. It's essentially what um rewarding that kind of behavior is. Another way of doing this is disagreement which instead says okay instead of having one world model, one world model might not be enough to distinguish between what's what's called a leatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty. So if you have some randomness in the environment that you really can't predict, just taking prediction error like surprise, you'll always have a high prediction error for for noise. And one way to get around that is if you have um a collection an ensemble of world models, you can just take the variance in their prediction to to measure novelty as well. Um and so this this alleviates the problem of of uh aliatoric noise since you know if if all of your models with the same capacity are predicting the same thing that means you really are predicting a random distribution and so you'll predict the mean or some other statistic and the variance of your ensemble will be zero. Um another way to get around this is called learning progress. So instead of just caring about your prediction error now you just try to keep track of the temporal history of your prediction error. So you keep two models omega theta prime and theta and one is just an exponential filter over the weights of the other one. So one's just lagging behind according to this time scale gamma. And what this does is gives you some basically a rate of change in a way of your prediction error. So that if your prediction error isn't changing, so you're you're constantly behaving in a way that causes predictions to to just stay constant, then uh you don't that behavior isn't reinforced. So your reward is zero or close to zero until you choose behavior where your prediction error changes from this this moving baseline. So this just measures prediction error gain. So this is like the way we think of autonomy in computer science. It's like okay, we we're in an environment, we don't have an extrinsic reward. Here's some functions given a predictive model that we can encourage the agent to behave in in different ways and this works really well in some domain. So Atari this has shown a lot of success. So Atari's I'm sure you guys are familiar. It's just like pixel games with some abstract actions like moving left or and right and shooting and things like that. So it's successful there successful in Mario similar type of game. Um but what about uh reinforcement learning problems that are closer to those that humans and animals face like continuous control. So these are examples from the deep mind control suite. We have a humanoid and other embodiment. If you just apply things like this, does it work in continuous control with high degree freedom bodies? And the question is like not really. So this is a really simple embodiment. It's just a six link swimmer. And this is trained with one of these uh the disagreement version of this curiosity. And you can see it just kind of tweaks around in this space, right? It might be exploring or it might be curious in a sense, but it this kind of curiosity in in a continuous control doesn't correspond to the kind of curiosity like I was showing for example the baby, right? It's not manipulating objects. It's not really moving around its environment. It's not pursuing new states and things like that. So clearly there's something missing with these kinds of uh with these algorithms and and the question for us is what is what is that? So how do we close the gap between you know what we think of in in neuroscience is animal autonomy and intelligent flexible decision-m and machine autonomy which is like just computational curiosity and exploration. Um to do that we need to revisit you know what do we mean by animal autonomy and to do that um we want to design experiments that that we can validate and uh uh computational models against. So what would these experiments need to have? So on one sense they need to be naturalistic environments. So, uh, naturalist environments are great because they allow they don't restrict the agent's action space or or restrict it to do some silly task. Like in earth science, the most common task for decision-m is it's called two alternative force choice task. And much like an Atari game, the animal just has to select basically between left and right actions. But really like uh mice, even them, they have uh articulated joints in their fingers, right? They have full dexterity. They can manipulate objects. They can run, climb, jump, they can do all types of things. They're social creatures. And so, um, ecological environments like putting them in places where, you know, their their embodiment can actually lead to and emerge, um, interesting behaviors is really important if you want to understand autonomy. Um, importantly though, the cognitive states, you know, that you're going to study have to have clear behavioral readouts, right? You don't want two naturalistic behavior because if, for example, this mouse on the left is just running around, it's not clear at all if there's like an interesting cognitive state associated with that. So, you want to make sure you're careful about um you want the environment to be, you know, ecological, but you don't want it to just be completely open-ended. And then finally, you want uh large scale multi area neural recordings cuz, you know, it's it's really important to try to understand for something like, you know, autonomy at this scale, the different brain areas that are involved in the computations are performing. Commonly, this is, you know, we only record from hundred or thousands of neurons in a single area at once. And so it's it's um not going to work if we want to understand multiple multiple scales. Um and so for example these these two uh papers here it meets this first criteria but because you know it's just way too open-ended and you know this the brain areas we record from aren't really multi area or not really large scale it's going to be hard to validate our model. So the third option is more or less okay. Even if we have pretty restricted neural recordings, maybe we can we can still use that more but more importantly that there's no clear cognitive state associated with this. So it's not going to be easy to map on to the type of autonomy. Uh that's interesting. Okay. But in 2019, so a group out of Genealia research came out with this paper that meets all three of these design criteria. So um this is from Misha Aren's lab and basically what what they're studying is zebra fish in virtual reality. So what they have is uh zebra fish in a tank with a projected ground plane moving below it and they're recording motor neuron activity from the tails. And so in the in the tail motor neuron activity will actuate the the plane in in the direction corresponding to uh the motor neuron activity. So for example this is what it looks like. the zebra fish's headfixed and um zebra fish have this interesting homeostatic behavior that when they in their natural environment so they're they're um native to freshwater streams but they when they experience a current flow that displaces them they like to resist it so they don't like to just be moved around by water. So in this case since it's in virtual reality you can simulate that by moving the ground plane against its heading direction. And when it experiences that it it perceives that it's being displaced even though it's head fixed because of this optic flow. And then it actuates you know it sends motor commands to to actuate the ground plane floor. So this is the experimental setup. Um it's it's not completely naturalistic. It's ecological in the sense that um you're able to put this virtual reality experiment exactly in the onetoone mapping with the real sort of uh naturalistic environment of being in a open fluid environment. So uh what they're studying here is called a behavior called futility induced passivity. So um what's happening is there's two experimental conditions closed loop and open loop. And in closed loop, basically the swim tries the the fish tries to swim and it's uh swim commands will elicit the optic flow feedback it expects, right? So it'll see the ground plane move in response. But in the openloop condition, then you can because this is in virtual reality, you can just withhold the optic flow response, right? And so when it tries to move, it will get no visual feedback. And what happens is after some repeated failures of this, the fish ends up giving up. So it stops trying to to move at all because it recognizes some failure. Um, so basically what that looks like in a trial is, you know, you'll put the fish in the environment, it'll be active for a long time. These are individual swim bouts. And then after a while it'll give up and this uh behavior just cycles back and forth and back and forth. So there's there's just repeated transitions between active and passive state. Okay. So why is this even an interesting behavior, right? It just seems like maybe the fish is is just giving up or getting tired or something. Um I won't go through all the data but in in the original cell paper the uh authors experimentalists uh did a lots of ablation studies to show that this wasn't the case. So the passivity the behavioral transition wasn't due to fatigue it and importantly it wasn't driven by the homeostatic drive of just wanting to displace your current. Um and they also show it wasn't due to some you know struggle with with actually learning to control the ground plane. So I won't go into the details. If you're interested you can check out this paper. But given that those things were demonstrated um it really indicates that passivity arises from this an awareness of this decoupling between sensory feedback and behavior right so that the zebra fish are actually aware that their uh fish commands aren't eliciting the sensory feedback they expect which implicates some type of predictive model right and so by by world model here I just mean it it has some information about the expected sensory feedback under normal conditions and so this is the basis of our of our work um so what are the normal mechanisms of this. Um, so here's the uh what's cool about zebra fish is that while they're larae, um, you can uh they're actually transparent and they develop locomotive maturity really quickly. So you can do whole brain calcium imaging and get single cell resolution uh neurons. In this case, they're also recording aststerytes. And in closely, you see not much going on, right? You see maybe some neurons related to to probably vision and motor, you know, activating as they're swimming forward. Um, not much going on here. As soon as you put um the the fish in open loop, let's see what happens. So, as it tries to swim, make swim attempts, you see this huge whole brain activation of neurons and there's this huge whole brain activation of radial aststerytes that are lagging behind, right? You see astrotates are even still active. Um if this if we see this again, right, huge activity, then the astroytes pick up and so they're seems like they're doing some sort of handoff, right? And the astrites are are just really nice. And if if we go back here, right, no such activity happens when they're just swimming, right? So there's clearly, you know, these neurons already you can just see at a really course level are representing this change in in the environment physics. Um, okay. So what are the neural mechanisms of this? So basically what they show is that there are these neurogeneric neurons that are signaling these swim attempts as as you're as you're making the swim attempts in the open loop environment. You see this here like you have this high delta f here um as as you're being active and all the while you have these astrotates that seem to be like they're acting as evidence accumulation. So they're accumulating these error uh detection that's detected by the neurons and eventually they hit some threshold and the neurons you know as you become passive just completely go silent um corresponding to exactly you switching off your activity. So there's no longer any sensory motor mismatch here and then um your aststerytes decay at slower time scale. So the the circuit they propose for this is this. So they have some neurogeneric neurons that are you know detecting this error and then radial aststerytes with branches and with with processes that synapse onto both noreric neurons and GABA neurons facilitate this behavior. So they accumulate the calcium in between the the synapses of norurgic neurons and that calcium then goes into other processes that um uh connect to GABAurgic neurons some in other brain areas and that causes um inhibition of motor neurons. So the calcium from the radio radial asteroides that accumulates from the the NMO neurons causes inhibition. Um and so our question then is like okay given this circuit and we given that we know it's not something as simple as fatigue or homeostatic drive what other intrinsic drive would explain this behavior right so specifically we know um based on the experimental evidence that there's a world model here and in machine autonomy and exploration in RL we also use world models so but world models there fail right so how should world models actually be used to guide autonomous decisions in animal situations real world situations for example in this encountering unseen physics. So here's where um you know we'll break down the our the recent results from our project on this. Okay. So a top down model utility induces passivity. Um we we basically build uh this zebra fish experiment from scratch. Um so we we built a a simple six length swimmer in and Mo is a physics simulator. Um and uh we're training it in this uh experimental protocol. So it's head fixed and this is a firstp person point of view from the fish. So it's not actually swimming here. This is just the the ground plane moving uh against it uh away from it. Um and so the actuation here, so there's two components of the embodiment, actuation sensing. As far actuation goes, it really does the embodiment really doesn't matter so much as is affords a faithful comparison with the animal behavior, right? So if your behavioral signal is really low dimensional, in this case, it really is, right? The fish is just switching between on and off. Um, the embodiment can be lowdimensional, but honestly, you know, open source embodiment that that capture this uh behavioral this this basic ethology already exists, so we might as well use it, right? Um, and as for sensing, the zebra fish behavior, you know, we know it's d mostly driven by vision and appropriate reception, you know, awareness of of where you are in the environment and if you sent motor commands and such. Um, so a basic model, basic vision model and state information sufficient for that. So our philosophy here is like like why this simulation is u at least for me it's just to build the most convincing model possible right so um what that means is that it's stimulus computable so operates in the same image uh same input space as the animal um that allows you know this this kind of model to generalize to lots of behaviors and lots of tasks right where if you built a bottom up or or toy model right you would have to hand compute optic flow features and and a control system in a way that would only apply for this task and for a different task right you you can't you can't generalize it. Uh realistic physics, I think this is important just because it's it's really interesting when you learn in a physics simulator. So in this case, uh there's fluid forces, uh there's gravity, and it captures the basic sorts of trade-offs between uh moving forward and and and fluid resistance. And even in simple physics like that that's roughly approximate to to real situations, it's amazing what kind of emergent behavior will will come about just because you know you actually have to deal with the physics. So if you introduce flow or or currents in this the response of the agent is is kind of unexpected in lots of cases but you would only be able to know if if you uh presented the agent put it in an environment with that's that's somewhat realistic. And finally flexible parameterization I just mean that the the model has to accommodate many different types of uh loss functions architectural choices right you have to be able to swap it out to be able to test different hypotheses. Again a bottom bottom up models or really simplistic models wouldn't be able to do this. Um so what is the parameterization? So in our case we we have a a pretty basic uh deep reinforcement learning agent setup. So there are two inputs. There's visual input and and propriceptive input. They're both encoded dural networks. Um the vision network is just a small residual network. This is just an MLP. They both produce features that are just concatenated and sent along to three modules. So there's the core module which is just learning the expected discounted reward. So it's learning the value function given a hidden state. This is RNN. Um the policy again learns the output actions. This is stoastic policy based on a hidden state learned from these features. And then there's an intrinsic drive module which just implements the the world model hypothesis that we're going to be testing. Um importantly this doesn't train the intrinsic drive model isn't used to train any of these feature spaces or anything like that. it's just used as a engine to generate intrinsic reward. Um, and so because of this parameterization, we're going to show uh that basically the circuit proposed in this paper emerges in in this network in interesting ways. Okay. So what happens if we uh test the sorts of uh existing approaches to epistemic curiosity or exploration from reinforcement learning? Uh it turns out it's it's just not enough. So here are those four algorithms I was talking about before. Uh R&D I didn't introduce, but it's really similar to ICM. just uses a random feature space. It's it's just surprise in a random feature space instead of a learned one. And what you see is that um what what I'm showing here is different activity traces over training. So this is a uh different points in training, different model checkpoints. And you see that the the behavior of these agents doesn't really correspond to any stable transitions or switching between states. Um rather you get kind of these blips here and there. Maybe there's something stable going on, but it's transient, right? for a single roll out and it disappears and it's not full switches between active and passive. So again these are the this is the norm of its uh whole uh torque output vector. So a high value could correspond to complete movement a low value corresponds to complete passivity. There's some kinds of switch going on but even ones that are somewhat commerate don't match the full behavior. And so what's going on here? Like why is it so uh unstable? Why is it going to capture this? Um there are two reasons. Um one is just that uh rewards are non-stationary uh which is kind of a problem in reinforcement learning when you define intrinsic reward because the consequence is that any given in strategy is transient right so if you look at the formulation of something like uh this red one here uh theta is being optimized online right so if you encounter states and you get some prediction error that prediction error is back propagated back into the the network and learned and so the next time you encounter the same state and take the same action you it won't be as novel as anymore which good for some applications, but clearly not for this application because the kind of animal autonomy we're talking about here, you animals take repeated behavioral strategies when that's the optimal strategy, right? They don't just decay um their behavior to to nothing or or change it arbitrarily, right? So this kind of curiosity, novelty optimization isn't sufficient. Um the other issue is that the rewards can proceverate on unpredictable or uncontrol uncontrollable stimuli. So what I just what I mean by this is again if you look at a formulation like this red equation here if you're if you're trying to predict noise so your state and action corresponds to just some noisy observation if there's inherent noise in your environment that will continually be re rewarded right because your prediction error will never decrease for example I'm predicting random noise and so that's not ethological right animals don't do that when there's uncontrollable elements in their environment or unpredictable elements they don't proceverate on that that behavior right they move away from they explore something else. Whereas, you know, these kinds of approaches to novelty optimization wouldn't capture that kind of ethology. So, what's the solution? Solutions are just really simple. Like these classic methods from reinforcement learning, they're really interesting and have a lot of power in certain cases, but they don't have enough information. So, one one some one way of solving this just incorporate priors. We know the zebra fish behavior depends on having some ethological memory. So, again, by memory here, I just mean a dynamics prior. can be fixed or it can be really slowly adapting but you have a prior that when you encounter training environments like this uh can guide behavior right so having a dynamics prior is already what you need to calculate sensory motor feedback error to begin with right so the fact that there's experimental evidence to to that indicate that you're tracking error right already implicates you you have to have some sort of dynamics prior so that error can be defined okay so how do we do this so we introduce 3M progress um I'll explain what This means um which uses ethological memory to to guide behavior in this way. So what we do is we define two environments. Uh one is an ethological one. So here the agent can just swim around freely uh in a normal fluid force environment. It can navigate to goals. It can just learn to swim or or resist uh current and it it distills a world model from these transition dynamics. So online learns this world model online um and and that acts as its fixed prior. And then there's the ethological evaluation environment which where we headfix the agent. Right? So here it's head fix. It's trying to swim but it can't. Right? So this environment doesn't obey the physics of the ethological environment. And we choose these environments just so that they satisfy this condition. Namely there's a subset of the stated action space in which the transition kernels agree. So as long as these two environments satisfy that condition then taking any residual between them in this case they're they're probability distribution. So we can choose a residual as a KL divergence. Then you'll get partitions of the state action space into two regions. Regions where the transition kernels agree. So where the world model memory and the where the current world model theta prime and the memory theta agrees. So that's would be you. And when they disagree, right? Anything that's not in you. So as long as you you set up your environments that the eth ethological environment is some some set where you can learn dynamics realistic dynamics and whatever environment you're in post in after that when you continually learn in that um you can use this divergence use this residual as a compass and how to navigate relative to the memory that that you've had before. Um so what does this look like? Um again there are these two partitions where epsilon is large right where you have model memory disagreement and where epsilon is small. And so when memories agree um that's this will be small and when it disagrees it'll be large. And again similar to existing techniques we don't want the agent to proceverate on any given uh region. So we one way just a computational way of doing this is just defining an exponential filter over this pink signal. Which means if we use that as a moving baseline um and and take our our actual learning signal as the subtraction of those two things the moving baseline will always catch up to to the pink um if as if if if you proceverate on any given uh partition and then we just use the absolute value here to make the symmetric. So deflections in either way away from the baseline uh are rewarded. That way you can transition between both partitions. And this creates 3M progress. So it's called that because model memory mismatch and progress. It uses a learning progress type mechanism where you're we're comparing two models. Um and that creates this this uh smooth reward function that uh doesn't proceverate and uh doesn't saturate with experience. So what happens when you train agents with this? So here we see the same plot before but now with rein progress and you get these really nice stable transitions, right? where they're stable throughout learning um already even in the first checkpoint you can look at they already have this right whereas other agents even if they discover something where they switch it's later on in learning and it all disappears um and in the real zebra fish is an example of of a trial so what will happen is you get these black and yellow where black is active and passive and you'll switch in between them and if you just look at the activity traces of a three in progress agent right you already see a pretty qualitative agreement with that um so this is taken from you know if you just look at the or transitions over learning uh the 3M progress or you know will stabilize to a fixed number uh where you can change that number by changing the parameters of of this reward formulation whereas you know the the most similar other model like gamma progress or any of the other ones right they they all decay to zero or some other fixed uh transition count um that doesn't doesn't capture the ethology. So given that we have this behavior right we can ask okay if we if we define a behavioral similar similarity which in our case just correlation between uh transition windows um we can just ask how similar is our model versus other models and so there are two types of transitions active to passive that would be like a switch in the downwards direction and passive back to active which be a switch back to activity and so you can see this model obviously you know we can already just visually see it would have a high correlation with the real zebra fish behavior whereas these other models right they Um I I won't explain all the the implementation details of this but homeostatic agent is basically an agent that balances uh the positional homeostatic drive to move forward with uh energy cost. So that can you like things like that you can imagine you can get a switch right sure you can switch from activity to passivity um and you get a decent behavioral alignment but again you won't have a model that switches backwards um same thing with other model free approaches like something called max entropy reinforcement learning you just uh reward uh the policy based on its randomness um so another thing oops I guess some animations got messed up here u I'll just put them both up u another thing we can do is like okay we have a model that does the behavior now we finally really want to get to the interesting part is does this actually match uh neural data right and so uh interestingly there's a we can first define this relative to an inter interan animal alignment so interestingly zebra fish between two individuals there's a onetoone alignment between individual neurons in gao meaning you can take a neuron and a and a target zebra fish and you can find a maximally predictive single unit in a source zebra fish according to correlation alone so you don't use a population neurons to do this you can just use one cell and you can get 100th percentile correlation with another cell in the zebra fish doing the same activity. So that interan animal alignment is our ceiling basically and you can see the 3M progress saturates that ceiling. though whereas other models come close and if you're curious why they come close have you talk about that later um comes down to our evaluation criteria choices but even with those choices you know 3M progress still outperforms those um and interestingly all model based methods so models that use world models predictive models outperform model free methods and data derived methods um so data derived methods here just this is a gajian process meaning we fit this non-parametric uh model to the actual data the mean of the the neural activity it does well, but it's still not as well as a model that actually behaves. Um, and so the criteria we ultimately really care about is uh how well does this do both, right? So, if we look at the model brain alignment against the model behavior alignment, um the the true test of the model is if you can get a model that behaves and implements uh uh computations in a way that the the animal does. And we see three in progress up here, it achieves the closest uh in in both of these. So that's really nice cuz this is basically I mean as I was talking about in the beginning there's these different touring tests um and we really believe that if if we're going to do model bearing comparisons it's import important that models of the brain behave like the brain and and this is what we're trying to get at okay um the other thing that we want to talk about is just that uh the circuit that was proposed here um in the muddle paper that cell paper the experimentalists who conducted that research um emerged naturally from 3M progress agents right So if we look at uh if we look at the the latent dynamics, so if we train a agent with this reward function, right? Reward function is cyclic. Each of these components don't necessarily reflect error accumulation, right? The reward function itself doesn't. Um but because the the agent has to learn to predict this reward that's built on a predictive model. What we see when we look at the latent dynamics across uh agent and zebra fish is a really nice uh one toone correspondence. So you can see that these principal components the dominant latent dimensions nicely reflect evidence accumulation and air tracking. So PC1 would just be this air tracking and PC2 would just be evidence accumulation which is very similar to what's going on in zebra fish. Um and so the fact that you know these kinds of circuits can just emerge if you as long as you achieve the behavior it's really powerful right it gives us a a good hypothesis for how you can build embodied agents that implement computations in the way that that brains do. Okay. So, um I'll wrap up and uh just talk about what the takeaways of this this kind of research are for both neuroscience and AI. Um for neuroscience, uh this is just a testament to how powerful top- down models are. So, when when you combine them with deep reinforcement learning, uh the neural circuit hypotheses that are proposed from neuroscience can be validated in closed loop. Right? This is kind of the the goal of of building a hypothesis in neuroscience is be able to to see it come to life and actually do causal experiments in a closed loop simulation. Otherwise, right, if you if you take a standard uh uh approach where you record neural data of some some specific behavior, you can't ever causally manipulate it to the extent that would be required to to validate that circuit hypothesis. Um here we're showing that a circuit actually proposed by experimentalists really is the key ingredient of achieving this behavior. It really does uh when you when you embed agent with this circuit, it does allow the agent to to do this. So, it's really nice to see that. Um and also tells us that uh behavior it it's nice if if we choose as a target exponandum because if we really focus on trying to get the behavior right, it's usually enough to impose the constraints that you would have to have anyways on the implementation details, right? So, for example, the behavior of just switching between these two states. There's lots of models that could do that, but as we're showing, right, it's it's only models that implement the behavior with the right type of uh generality, right? If you're just switching between fatigue states, right? Um that hypothesis was invalidated by experimental results. So, if you really pay attention and get the behavior right as you know that matches, you know, experimental results, then that that's a good place to start because the rest kind of just follows naturally from that. um for artificial intelligence. This sort of reminds us that uh air tracking and minimization are fundamental computations. So it's obviously not a new idea, but it's just amazing how simple these m these computations are and how how diverse they can be, how how you can use them at different scales. So um this requires models to have feedback loops and it requires them to have predictions, right, at multiple scales. So this isn't something that's just specific obviously to you know things at the neural scale of individual neurons computing error and things like that but whatever your predictive model as long as it predicts in the same input and output space as your biological system um you can define the right type of error and and motivate really interesting behaviors. Um and the last thing which I think is the most important is a kind of flipped view on how to design learning systems. So typically in machine learning right the way that we uh get at behavior the way that we define a model is saying okay by a loss function we say I want my model to perform a specific behavior I want it to perform this task I'm going to computationalize computationalize that task as a specific function and I'm going to I'm going to optimize that function. Um but I think for behavior like autonomy but this could apply to other tasks as well. It's not it's it's not the case that we have like maybe 20 100 different loss functions that each correspond to different behaviors. Rather, we have a single or a very small set of objective functions that are quite general. And the way that we program behavior is by implanting these memories and that can be programmable and rewritable, right? So by by swapping out in this case like a dynamics prior which uh dynamics model is a different memory completely change behavior. Well, you're not changing objective function. So if you can get the intrinsic objective function right that just uses plugins for different memories, right? Then um you can program behavior that way instead of trying to parameterize the full space of uh full function space of uh behaviors. Um so memories here can mean dynamics models, right? But they can also mean motor synergies or cognitive maps. Um anything that that uh gives you a fixed primitive. Um so yeah, uh with that, I'd just like to say thanks. I plan this to to just not take too long for your guys' time. So, thanks to the team uh Zach Pico and Leo and Iran who are my adviserss for this and and some students Felix and Elaine who helped out with this. Um, yeah.