My name is Matt Seagull. I'm a process philosopher and transdisciplinary researcher. I teach uh process philosophy as an associate professor uh at the California Institute of Integral Studies in a department called philosophy, cosmology, and consciousness. And I'm excited to talk to you today about Michael Michael Leven's platonic research program for biology. I want to try to accomplish three things. First, I'll briefly introduce uh Michael Leven's program um and why I think it's so significant. Second, I want to unfold a process relational white hedian way of understanding what his lab is uncovering. That's Alfred North Whitehead's uh process philosophy. Um, this approach will, I hope, honor a structured realm of possibilities, what he calls the realm of eternal objects, without turning those possibilities or patterns into some kind of um disembodied puppet masters. Third, I'll suggest how this reframing reshapes our broader metaphysical picture of the relationship between matter and form, law and novelty, physics and biology. Uh, and I might even need to make a few theological points. Um, by the way, this is my my cat Pho. He's decided to join me for this. So the mystery of biological form has led some biologists uh most prominently uh Michael Leaven back to Plato's theory of ideas. Leven's lab has produced a series of remarkable results on uh bioelectric patterning in morphogenesis. The headline here is uh simple enough basically as I understand it. If you tinker with the bioelectric fields that guide embryological development, uh you can profoundly alter the resulting anatomy of the organisms uh in question, inducing, for example, uh most shockingly eyes on the tail uh of a tadpole uh or reorganizing tissue fragments into novel motile collectives. So Levan is driven primarily by these surprising empirical findings. He argues that the behavior of cells, tissues, whole organisms, uh multisellular organisms is often best explained by reference to modes of causality that are not traceable to genetic histories or local molecular components. DNA is necessary, of course, but it's not sufficient. This is a major shift in biological thinking. The genome does not specify uh coordinate by coordinate where every cell must end up in uh a metazzoan organism. Instead, Levan, as I understand it, is suggesting that cells participate in a larger space of morphogenetic possibility, a kind of platonic morphospace as he has taken to calling it. So he's now framing his work as a platonic research program and claiming that both biological form and organismic agency ingress from a realm beyond physical spaceime with external bodies physical bodies functioning as what he calls thin user interfaces. He uses this term ingress which he borrows from Whitehead. He's quick to add though that he's not necessarily affirming or denying Plato's full philosophy. Um rather he's trying to think uh this idea of form and link his hypothesis to a contemporary position in the philosophy of ma of mathematics. So this is not really an argument about how to interpret Plato in the context of the history of philosophy but a specific Platonic philosophy of mathematics, platonic realism uh about mathematical relations and objects. Right? So from Levven's perspective, if you can recompose living tissues uh in into xenobots or anthrobots that reliably discover or create uh functional forms and aims that have never been selected for by any ancestral lineages, clearly then something more is going on than the uh playing out of genetic scripts. when a xenobot displays novel capacities, the cost wasn't paid by phoggenetic selection. So as a result, his claim that there must be some ordered latent uh what I would call prespace of possibilities or topos of possibilities uh his claim is that this space of possibilities from which uh such definite patterns can be drawn must be affirmed. This is a very different ontology than the typical physicalism that has guided science up to this point. So, it's tempting in light of all of this to imagine a realm of timeless patterns that determines the flux of matter um in physics but also in biology. And that temptation is hardly a new one. uh it's the basis in fact of of the supposedly physicalist concept of a deterministic law of nature. You know the idea that the messy contingencies of the world are ultimately governed by some kind of hidden timeless mathematical blueprint. So the challenge here though is to articulate the reality of form and thus avoid a kind of nihilistic tail spin into nominalism. But to do so without slipping into a rigid platonism where perfect immutable originals are impressed upon physical bodies conceived as mere passive imitations, poor copies or worse as uh what Levan calls scratch pads for some kind of disembodied intelligent agency. So let me say where I agree with Levan and where I hesitate a bit. Um, I've been in dialogue with with Mike for several years now and I'm really excited, thrilled even by his research and many of his theoretical moves. I think he's absolutely right to resist genetic reductionism of course and to insist that organismic agency is driving morphology and morphogenesis. Um the mechanistic picture uh as classically conceived traded almost exclusively in efficient causes that is pushes from behind as it were um where parts are externally related to other parts. Genes push molecules, molecules push cells, cells push tissues and somehow at the end of this chain of pushing you get an organism. Um but obviously or I hope obviously this story misses something essential. Uh cells, tissues, organisms exhibit large scale patterns and homeis uh really an astonishing degree of error correction and ingenuity in the face of perturbations from the environment and from the stochasticity of molecules within uh the cell membrane. So, um, these are not just mechanical outcomes of some kind of biochemical pinball game. They look much more like the work of agents responding to what Whitehead would call lures or pulls from a head. And I think Levven's work, his empirical experimental lab work is showing precisely this, foregrounding this sense of a a lure or a pull from a head. So his xenobots, anthrobots, they're making it vividly clear that you can chop up and and recombine living tissues into configurations that evolution uh the phenal genetic history of that organism never saw before. And yet these novel life forms can spontaneously discover coherent morphologies and behaviors. The organism then is not simply pushed into shape by its past. It's reaching toward possible futures, forms that have not yet ingressed in its lineage. So, so far so good. I affirm the reintroduction of formal and final causality into biology. But where I begin to hesitate is the way that uh Lean sometimes describes the relation between patterns and their embodiment. He uses interface in a a technical computing sense uh you know terminals uh thin clients um that are frontending a distant mainframe right and his warning is that if you theorize only the front end you misdiagnose misunderstand the the system and you know fair enough so far as that analogy goes but my worry is that there's a slide here from front end to mere puppet basically so it says If agency is living elsewhere and bodies, organisms uh are but sort of nothing more than the disposable terminals. Um so on this picture, agency belongs to the patterns that that exist in some sort of a trans spatial temporal morphospace while bodies organisms are the thin user interfaces uh scratch pads as I've heard Levven describe them upon which those patterns inscribe their designs. This this is a kind of bifurcation that I worry repeats this the old split uh of a kind of two world platonism that I really want to overcome. Now we can question whether uh two world a two- world ontology is really what Plato is articulating in his dialogues. I'm not going to get into that right now because that's not really Mike's interest. Um but I want to avoid this kind of dualism um between agent agential forms and mere uh bodies that uh are steered around or puppeteered by those forms. Um this risks assigning all the reality to abstract patterns, all the agency to abstract patterns and it demotes organismic life to something u more or less like an epiphenomenal display. So I want a reformed what I would call a reformed process relational platonism in which um along the lines of of Whitehead's philosophy in which organisms are the the present locus of decision even as they orient themselves uh in relationship to a structured realm of relevant possibilities or eternal objects in Whitehead's terms. So there is a real living constellation of forms but its patterns are not puppeteers. They are not the agents. The agency is with the organisms. the decision is made by organisms as to which forms to ingress. So uh to make forms agents is uh and and thereby render bodies pass passive is on my reading a version of what white had warned against as the fallacy of misplaced concreteness. So process philosophy is an alternative way of orienting towards these forms. It's it's an alternative proposal that I think avoids the extremes of both reductive materialism but also transcendent idealism. In Whitehead's terms, forms are potentier potentials. They're non-historical uh non-spatiotmporal possibilities with patterned relations among themselves. um and relations to actuality generally. Now any particular form is going to exist independently of particular actualities but from Whitehead's point of view the realm of forms does not exist independently of actuality generally. Um crucially these possibilities these eternal objects do not act. They have no agency. They are not uh efficient causes in Whitehead's scheme. um they ingress. Agency belongs to actual occasions of experience that do the ingression. Um the events of concretence as Whitehead refers to them. Uh that's what an actual occasion is. An event of concretence, a growing together, of past and possible into a novel uh entity which contributes itself back to the the process of reality. Um so in concretence the physical past is inherited. It meets the lure of unre realized potential and moment by moment um occasions of experience are deciding how to integrate the past with the possible. Um the possible the realm of forms are not the agents making the decisions. Right? So in every moment of concretence an actual entity prehends the world prehends its world. This is a perspectivalism uh in the Nietian sense. Every actual entity thus feels physically it it it feels the relevant features of what has already happened. And it conceptually entertains relevant possibilities that have not yet occurred. And these feelings, these prehensions in Whitehead's technical terms are not just passive impressions. They're factors in a decision. So the occasion is integrating what has been and what could be into a new act, a new actual, a new actual entity. And that act then becomes part of the world that another occasion will inherit. And let me actually diagram this briefly, this process of concretence, so you can get a kind of uh clearer picture of it. Sorry, just trying to share my screen here. There we go. So, I'm using some daffodils to illustrate the process of concretence. um which Whitehead describes as the process by which the many become one and are increased by one and concretence is happening at all scales of the universe at all times. He has an event ontology. So the universe is a network of events. It's not a collection of particles in empty space. This is how the process of concretence works in a schematic sense. There are perished objects in the past environment. These uh perished objects in the past have to be integrated with eternal objects or pure potentials that are not in the past. They're not in spaceime at all. And how this occurs is through a dipolar process. There's a physical pole and a mental pole to every actual occasion. Every concretence includes both poles. The physical pole is where these perished objects in the past environment are physically apprehended. This is what Whitehead calls the objective data of a concretence. The subjective data is then integrated into a subjective form which is the subjective response, the uh affective um response, the emotional tonality that arises in the occasion as it integrates the past. There's then a subjective aim that's helping to guide the integration of these many apprehensions from the past. And in the mental pole, there are these pure potentials, these eternal objects that ingress uh to help realize that subjective aim. Now, novelty is introduced as a result of the ingression of these pure potentials uh that were not yet in the physical pole, not yet in the past environment. If there were no ingressions of pure potentials, every concretence would simply repeat what occurred in the past, repeat what is felt in the physical pole. But in the mental pole, novel potentials are ingressed. Now, every concretence, every actual occasion, Whitehead says, feels the entire infinite realm of eternal objects. All possibilities are felt, but the vast majority are negatively apprehended, which is what this uh scissor is doing, cutting the strings that uh the prehensions, conceptual prehensions. This is what Whitehead calls negative prehension. Most of the possibilities are backgrounded and ignored and each concussing actual occasion is drawing on only those possibilities that are relevant to its own subjective aim. Right? So those possibilities are negatively prehended at the end of this process of the growing together of the various subjective data in the physical pole. Uh lured by the subjective aim a satisfaction is achieved and this is all experiential for white. He is a panexperientist. uh mind goes all the way down in the sense again that every concretence whether it's associated with an electron or a photon or u a dolphin uh has a mental pole um has this subjective aim subject subjective form subjective aim and a satisfaction and it's this moment of satisfaction where the many become one and are increased by one a subjective point of view is achieved but immediately perishes to become what he calls a superject and this superject uh then becomes part of the objective data to be inherited by the next round of concretence. It gains objective immortality uh in that sense. And so concretence is an iterative cumulative process whereby novelty is produced but continuity with the past is maintained. Right? Um that's a crash course in uh Whitehead's metaphysics of concretence. So moving along here um forms or eternal objects in whitehead sense become effective only as they are selected and transformed within the creative advance of living occasions within this process of concretence as I've just described it. So possibilities require the agential decisions of actualities of actual occasions to enter into history. This distinction I think is is really crucial. Um if we say that the patterns themselves are the agents then we end up by uh as a consequence basically collapsing the polarity between potentiality and actuality. We end up transposing brute fact from the realm of the actual into the realm of the possible and that cancels this difference um that maintains a polarity and it leaves us no room for genuine novelty. Um, Whitehead thinks in terms of polarities and this polarity between actuality and potentiality is very important for him. It's the dynamo of the creative advance, the dynamo, the engine of evolution if you want. Um, and to give abstract form agency is to treat forms as actualities, possibilities as actualities. Um, this this is metaphysically uh problematic. um from my point of view and this comes through sometimes when and this isn't just you know the way that Mike Leven talks it's it's common among some thinkers to refer to mathematical facts in this whiteheading way of thinking there's no such thing as a mathematical fact a fact is a con a contingent historical occurrence um when we talk about mathematical objects we're talking about forms we're talking uh possibilities. Um a fact and a form in Whitehead sense they're two different uh poles of uh concrete process. Um form would be the abstract pole. Um but we only know abstraction from a concrete point of view would be one rendering of what white had calls the onlogical principle. Um so in contrast to collapsing the distinction between actuality and potentiality, if we remember instead that possibilities do not act but are felt and chosen, then we preserve this creative tension that again is driving cosmic evolution from a Whiteheadian point of view. And we can say that organisms live in a value laden field of potentialities improvising new configurations that cannot in their singularity be predicted in advance. They are not merely implementing code. Um they are metabolizing information transforming signals into felt relevance and writing themselves as they read this information. So from this angle, I think Levan is right to insist that there must be an ordered latent space of possibilities from which novel morphologies can be drawn. But this realm beyond spaceime should not be thought as an abstract heaven of finished designs exerting top- down control. It's more like a structured continuum of adjacent possibilities whose relevance is always indexed to the acts of organisms to the decisions of living creatures. So forms are not eternal dictators. They're evolutionary companions. They're patterns of definitess that become determined only after they are they are taken up by living occasions. They're perishing out of eternality into immortality. a shift from pure potentiality to real potentiality in whitehead sense. So this brings us to a distinction I think that I think is vital. It's a distinction between cosmology and metaphysics. Um cosmology in this way of framing it at least is studying contingent patterns and regularities that that hold within our present cosmic epoch including biological habits of development and morphogenesis. but also uh physical habits, what are usually called laws and treated as if they are eternal. And Whiteheads view uh physical laws are really widespread habits. And so these patterns, these laws evolve and may change over long stretches of time. Um metaphysics by contrast seeks the categorical conditions that make such patterns, such cosmological epochs possible in the first place. And when we confuse the two, when we collapse metaphysics into cosmology, uh I think we we end up either elevating contingent uh forms of organization and physics and biology into transcendent absolutes or we reduce metaphysical conditions to the contingencies of our current cosmic epoch. Um now Levan does invite us to draw a distinction between physical constraints and what we might call biological capacities. This um for me immediately raises the question of whether formal causes or organizing patterns and final causes or lures of value ends goals uh that seem minimally operative in the physical world may become more salient in the biological world. But they're never entirely absent even in the physical. There are phases in the history of the universe, earlier phases of cosmogenesis that often just get quarantined under physics and treated as eternal bound by eternal law. Um but there are earlier phases where I think the scene is dominated um is not yet dominated by the regularities we call laws. Um, if we rewind, you know, 13.7 billion years ago to the first atoms, you know, this this picture of a supposedly um a physical world supposedly determined by fixed laws, eternal laws. Um, I think things look a bit different. It's, you know, picture the first hydrogen atom that's emerging. a proton and electron are entering into something like a symbiogenetic relationship to use Lin Margulus' uh biological concept. This wasn't the execution of a pre-written script, right? The first hydrogen atom emerges as a creative act. It's it's the expression of a new capacity for enduring existence. And so what now presents itself to us as a constraint. Looking back we see a periodic table of elements that seems fixed was once an achievement. So what is given now is really sedimented genesis. So if we follow that sedimentation forward um across eons we can see how achievements congeal into the scaffolding that constrains and enables subsequent novelty. So 4 and a half billion years ago on this planet a new kind of organization emerged that inherited these prior accomplishments these physical constraints as boundary conditions and as springboards. So on this view there's no sharp onlogical line anymore between non-living and living. There's a continuum of organization where formal and final causation is uh gradually coming into focus as organisms learn to exploit and recompose the constraints bequeafd by physics and chemistry. So biology on this reading is not merely pushed from behind by efficient causes. Uh the study of organis it's not merely the study of organisms pushed from behind by efficient causes. Biology is also the study of organisms um both in their behavior and in their morphogenesis as pulled from a head by ideals of form and by valuations. And it's the organisms that are doing the valuing here. Formal and final causes thus reenter uh the scientific scene as a pattern and as aim. Um this is a way of thinking about the embryo's morphogenetic sense of limb versus tail axis polarity proportion and so on. We can't understand these uh aspects of development without formal and final causality. I completely agree with Levven there. Um but I think that we need a we need to be more cautious about the metaphysics here. I think we need something like Whitehead's realm of eternal objects. And in Whitehead's account, these eternal objects, this topos of possibility, this continuum of possibility is ordered by uh a divine entity. Now, uh obviously there's a long history of antagonism between uh natural science and theology and religion, but it's also true that all of the founding fathers of the scientific program in at least the European uh modern western context were motivated theologically. Um the idea that the human mind uh could comport itself and come into resonance with the intelligible structure of nature was only uh uh credible as a research program to them because of a theological view of more or less a deist view. And we don't need to hold the deist view but Whitehead argued um for a kind of metaphysicians god. It's not a god of religious longing but of conceptual coherence. So, Whitehead's realm of eternal objects and uh the the god that he says invisages and orders this realm of eternal objects or possibilities is not uh we we shouldn't think of some preatterned cosmological program that determines actuality. Whiteheads God is not all powerful, not some sort of cosmic engineer. Um we just we need a name for the structured uh pre-space of potentia or the topos of adjacent possibilities that organisms can draw upon. Um that prevents the future from collapsing into the past that that that holds open a space of potential that's that's got a value vector to it. Right? It's not just randomly arrayed possibilities. its possibilities that seem to be organized and ordered in such a way so as to serve the intensification of organismic experience and agency. So crucially in Whitehead scheme the eternal is not some to be that this realm of eternal objects is not to be imagined as a kind of frosty stock room of pre-made uh potentials or frozen uh possibilities. In his Harvard lectures, his students record him uh suggesting that the realm of forms, this eternal this realm of eternal objects alters in its reference to temporal occasions of experience and to the historical process. So he says this is how his students recorded one of his lectures. I quote, the light of realization casts the shadow of truth back upon the realm of eternal objects, thus enriching it. So the historic process enriches eternity as each new fact, each novel uh actual occasion as it reaches its satisfaction becomes objectively immortal and thus uh there's a kind of evolving and growing sense of the eternal in Whitehead as um each concretence becomes in a sense an eternal fact um to be built on by the next moment uh of concretence. So eternity grows in this conception. Um there was a time when there were no elephants, right? There will be a time when elephants go extinct, but there will never be a time when there were never elephants, right? And so in this sense, Whitehead is arguing that uh realization actualization weaves durable fact values. And I I want to put a hyphen in there fact values because for whited every fact is the achievement of some value. Um every value uh has a factual uh uh dimension to it. Realization weaves durable fact values into the weft and weave of um of the universe and that feeds back onto this space this topos of possibility. So there's a there's a co-creative aspect uh to this polarity between actuality and possibility for Whitehead. In this dipolar scheme, eternal objects as pure potentials are gathered in the primordial aspect of the divine. What Whitehead calls the primordial nature of God. They're gathered into a a and unified into a continuum of relevance. So that um actual achievements, the realized forms of historical becoming uh can then be woven into what he calls the consequent nature of God, preserving as a as a kind of memory um what has been and also artistically aesthetically retuning it to the to the lure of what might yet be. So God um for Whitehead is an example of concretence. God is an everlasting concretence. So unlike all other finite concretences, God's concretence is said to be everlasting. It doesn't perish. Everything exists within this divine concretence. And in this way, you know, for Whitehead, God is not supposed to be an exception to the metaphysical scheme, but it's the first instance of its application, its chief exemplification. In other words, the macroscopic exemplar of concretence. And so, Whitehead is trying to account for a god that is both eternal and historical. Uh, he's trying to account for the way in which possibility and actuality are dynamically entangled and uh require one another but don't collapse into each other. So, Whitehead articulates what has come to be called Mario topology. Um, marology is a study of whole and parts, holes and parts. Uh, and he wants to understand the uh, relations among holes and parts in the continuum of of possibility. Um, topology is is the study uh, of of these relations. Uh, topos meaning place, right? It offers, I think, a more uh, concrete approach than what we usually think of as geometry. Topology is non-metrical. So you don't need rulers and coordinates or or fixed scales. Um and so the point here is that aside from a select group of um human beings, most organisms don't make decisions using meter sticks. They're not going out measuring the world. Cells as they engage in embryological development are not calculating one another's coordinates. Um, I think the engineering mindset that imagines DNA as a a set of instructions for computing where each cell needs to be at each moment mistakes an algorithmic uh blueprint for what is really more like a felt field. So I think a topological lens helps us see this uh more accurately, more sensitively. So we begin with the whole um when we're talking about life and organisms not with the parts begin let's begin as you know Mike Leven will often say we we all begin as physics and chemistry as a um fertilized embryo and then out of the process of development you get daycart or any human being. So we begin as one cell that cell divides. You begin with the whole and then get the parts in other words. So development is not an accumulation of discrete parts that finally produces an organism. It is a whole that differentiates into parts. The whole precedes the parts. So in mario topological terms um I think we can see how boundaries are not uh rigid seams but dynamic neighborhoods that thicken and thin as the organism negotiates its own becoming. Um parts are not molecular parts say they're not little machines that get bolted together. They're they're regions of a living gradient and they're transiently sta stabilized by ongoing relations within the whole. Um, and again, the whole precedes the parts here, right? That's what's crucial. And I think Leven's account and his lab's account of bioelectric fields helps us operationalize this into an empirical research program. This isn't just a speculative idea about wholeness. So, if we approach development um with an overly mechanistic or engineering mindset, I think we're always going to try to assemble the whole from pre-made components. We're going to be assuming a geometric picture that presumes we can measure everything in advance and assign each piece its coordinate. What I'm calling a topological approach here, speaking loosely, is more organic. It's about feeling one's place in a gradient just as each cell feels the shape of the bioelectric field around it. And gradients here are evaluative fields. They do not merely constrain, they invite, they go. And following Whitehead, we can say that the cell prehends its neighborhood. It feels relevant features of the past environment um relevant relative to the field of adjacent possibilities that halo it and then it decides u field effects like bioelectric potentials, morphagen gradients, tissue level tensions are not organizational afterthoughts. They're the medium of agency at the scale where the organism's aims become operative. None of this doesn't none of this denies the role of molecular interactions, genes, proteins, signaling cascades, and so on. But it places them within an organismic topology. To treat DNA as if it calculated coordinates is to mistake a syntax for semantics and a semantics for a lived pragmatics. The organism is not passively implemented by code. It's actively metabolizing relevant information. So the causal story is not a one-way push for molecules upward. It's a manyleveled resonance in which the whole converses uh the whole conserves itself by continually differentiating where we would expect robust flexibility, error correcting, morphogenesis, graceful accommodation and perturbation uh to perturbation. Um and and local innovations that the whole can then integrate. I think this reframing also touches on physics. It goes beyond biology. We habitually treat spacetime as some kind of a metrical container. But geometry um at least on Whitehead's view, the geometry of spacetime as Einstein had it is is you know we're really talking about a tool for our purposes. It's not the essence of the real. Um topology precedes geometry and experience. It's more concrete in that sense. Before we measure, we orient ourselves in place from a perspective. Before we count, we connect. And if the biological world is best understood in terms of these marriopological neighborhoods and gradients, then I don't think we should be surprised that physical spacetime too can be approached as a relational topology within which metrical structures are selected by organisms for the problems at hand. Um there are multiple geometries that can model one in the same physical situation. In other words, none is the is the beall and endall. Um there is more than one geometry that could apply to the structure of the physical world. The organism's way of knowing its way of feeling um gradients is hinting at a deeper kinship I think between the biological and and physical orders than uh measurement alone discloses. So Levan understandably stresses mathematical order and he talks about uh information and you know here again I largely agree with his approach but with one important nuance. Um I share what I understand to be his resistance to equating the latent ordered space morphospace with information understood as passive data. um information is not information unless it is metabolized right so um as Gregory Basin would say information is a difference that makes a difference and I would just add it's a difference that makes a difference to somebody to some organism um and I think whitehead's term prehension helps here organisms feel or prehend the world in both modes physically by taking up what has already happened and conceptually by entertaining relevant possibilities not yet actual. And organisms transmute these feelings physical and conceptual into a new fact or uh a new act. Apprehension is like uh eating data uh transforming it into oneself even as one is transformed in turn by it. So agency isn't something beamed in from above. It's something enacted as decision. a decision in the process of concretence. Wherever organismic relations reliably covary and here I'm drawing on some of the work of Bonita Roy. Um whenever organismic relations reliably covary information is realized right that's how measurement really works and and why there's no actu absolutely external observer. um we can't talk about ready-made information independent of the observer to whom that information is relevant. So if by information we mean passive data awaiting a receiver, we've already flattened what makes communication so miraculous. In living organisms, information again is observer and situation relative. It's realized only in the act of uh what my friend Bonita Roy calls the co-variance between an agent and its environment. A gradient means climb or descend only for a system that has a meaningful way of coupling with it. So in this sense, information is is not something that's stored, right? It's not readymade. It's enacted. It's produced in the act. It's an interpretive act. The organism brings virtual possibilities into play by co-varying with what matters in its neighborhood. Um, and so if there's a map of development, it's not a static diagram of destinations and coordinates. It's an ongoing manyleveled resonance of a whole that knows itself only by continuing to become itself. I think Whitehead helps us uh his his language, his metaphysical scheme helps us keep all these threads together. So each moment in the life history of an organism is a concretence. There are physical apprehensions of what has been, conceptual apprehensions of what could be unified by an evaluative decision that becomes a new fact. The organisms uh Mario topology is nothing other than the pattern of these decisions accumulated as habit and revisable by novel feeling. Parts are like habits in place. holes are uh habits that hold those parts in place and help them find novel pathways of development. So a formal cause is the pattern that makes sense of the parts and a final cause would then be the lure that keeps the pattern from collapsing into mere repetition inviting novelty. So to avoid this bifurcation I mentioned earlier that that worries me uh when agency is applied to forms and organisms are treated as scratch pads um or thin interfaces. I think we need a richer more layered ontology. So my physical body is something like the fruing body or mushroom that sprouts from a deeper mycelial network. And most of what is causally relevant to the present concretence of each moment of my experience is rammifying beyond the boundary of my skin uh temporally, you know, into ancestral achievements, developmental trajectories, cultural inheritances and spatially uh in terms of the microbiomes and ecological networks and the social and technological contexts that surround me. If we attend only to the mushroom, to the fruing body, we miss the tangle of mycelium. If we attend only to the mcelium, we miss the mushroom. The right lesson here that I'm taking from this metaphor is not that uh is that we not exile agency to some abstract heaven of patterns but embrace a more rich richly textured ontology kind of graded layers of organization and efficacy. uh physical, chemical, physical and chemical habits, bioelectric fields, sensory motor schemas, symbolic and aesthetic orders um that are all stacked and and interpenetrating. In Whitehead's terms, organisms always exist and make decisions in the thick present. They inherit the past through physical apprehension while feeling lures from relevant possibilities. This is conceptual apprehension. formal and final causes, form and aim. They're not uh aloof puppeteers that are pulling the strings from another dimension. They are the modes of agency that are internal to organic occasions of experience. The the ways that living a living nexus of um occasions is leveraging constraints into capacities. So what looks like law from the outside is in its origins a habit acquired by successful acts of integration. What looks like passive material from one scale is at another scale a complex buzzing society of agents negotiating gradients and values. So from this perspective I think uh Leven's platonic morphospace can be read as an important cosmological hypothesis about the ordered possibilities that organisms can access and ingress. The process philosophy uh that I'm uh adding to the picture here um offers that this realm of possibility beyond spaceime is not a separate world but an aspect of this one. Uh it's the conceptual pull of concretence access through conceptual apprehension. It's um not a matter of leaving our embodiment behind but deepening our embodime embodiment as a result of the ingression of that which is beyond body and beyond space and time. So let me just briefly talk about the structure of this face of possibilities because this is where I think white's metaphysics becomes especially helpful. Um because of covariance tugging on one eternal object never brings only that one to the party so to speak. It arrives with an entourage. Um Whitehead names these patterned entouragees abstractive hierarchies in his his book science and the modern world published in 1925 in a chapter titled abstraction. Um and the point that he makes here with the way that uh possibilities come with entouragees is easier to see I think with the example of color. So, um, red, blue, and green, etc., they don't hover indistinctly as isolated, uh, possible shades or hues. They're interdefined within a web of relations that has both an experiential depth and a historical weight behind it. Um we can think here with Johan uh Gerta um for whom color was was not simply what appears when a prism decomposes white light as Newton had it um this sort of primmaasi neatness of Newton's spectrum I think uh from Gerta's point of view depends on a contrived uh geometry of apertures and screens and so on a crucial experiment whereas for Gerta um exploring the whole range of color phenomena, color becomes an edge phenomenon. It emerges where light and darkness meet and mingle. And so light and dark are thus more primordial in the hierarchy than the chromatic hues that they support and that emerge from u their uh mingling. So yellow and blue then appear as more elemental polarities than say green which is not primitive or primary in the same sense. Green arises out of the mixture of blue and yellow when blue and yellow mingle. So this is a kind of chromatic genealogy that is an expression of how possibilities hang together among themselves. If I pull on or grass green into experience I have whether I am conscious of it or not already pulled on blue and yellow in the background. So green coaries with them and this is precisely how an abstractive hierarchy works. An example of how it works. Um the availability of one form presupposes a constellation of correlated forms and contrasts that give it its unique sense. So notice a few things that follow here. First, the continuum of possibility. It's not a free floating menu of forms that exists entirely independent of actuality. our visual systems opponent processes and the polarities that we discover in practice through media and and light and the lived phenomenology of edges and gradients and so on. All of this tunes which colors are salient and how they can be composed. Second, notice the definitess of possibility cannot be reduced to any single actual occasion either. When green ingresses into a present act of seeing, it does so by drawing upon a relational matrix. uh light, dark, yellow, blue um that outruns the moment and yet is concretely felt within it. In Whitehead's terms, the eternal objects an occasion conceptually prehends are co-variant. They come in patterned constellations. This is how I think uh um this is how to think a structure of definite possibility that is neither detached from the actual world nor collapsed into it. The world's achievements and our organismic apparatus co-shape the very pallet of forms that can be felt, chosen, realized, decided upon. Uh mathematics offers another analogy here. While its truths feel timeless, um its practice shows that shows us that these truths emerge through the creative interplay of discovery and invention. uh Russell and Whitehead struggles in the Prancipia Mathematica illustrate the impossibility of grounding the whole edifice in a final logical foundation. Mathematics evolves through paradox, revision, imaginative leaps. Something similar holds for biological form. Organisms do not unfold according to rigid templates. They dip into a structured but evolving open field of potential, actualizing new patterns through their own activity. Now Leaven understandably stresses mathematical order but I think aesthetic and and ethical forms matter too. Scientific inquiry is lured by the beauty and goodness of truth for example. Uh so possibility is not just a matter of cold combinatorics. It's graded by a sense of worth. This is very important for understanding the norms which become very apparent in the biological world. uh if not in the physical though we could talk about that. Um Whitehead's primordial evaluation right his primordial nature of God is simply his account of how an otherwise unstructured infinitude of possibility becomes organized by relevance uh for finite agents. So let me then begin to wrap up here by offering a kind of reframing of of Levven's program a movement from conceiving of forms as puppeteers to conceiving of them as partners in evolution. I would say that uh Leven's entirely justified in positing a latent ordered space of form and aim. I think his experiments show that organismic agency cannot be reduced to local molecular interactions or to the ancestral record of natural selection. Cells, tissues, organisms all navigate a field of possibilities that vast vastly outruns anything encoded in DNA. But instead of saying that patterns in that field are the true agents and that bodies are merely thin clients, I want to say that organisms are the losi of agency and that they orient themselves by a structured continuum of possibilities, formal and final causes, patterns and aims are real, but they are internal to organismic decision-making. They're not external puppet strings. the thin interface metaphor if it suggests that agency resides in a disembodied mainframe that's behind the world behind organisms. This repeats the bifurcation of nature into dead matter and living ideas um that we see in the sort of caricature of Plato's two world theory. A process relational alternative would say that what Levan is calling um forms beyond spaceime is it's related to the to in Whitehead's terms the conceptual pole of concretence. It's always and only realized in and through the experience of actual entities actual occasions. Morphospace is not a separate realm to which we are hooked up, but the way the universe's accumulated achievements and primordial valuations show up as relevant lures for our present decisions. So on this view again, cosmology is the history of contingent creative events. It's the story of how capacities become constraints, become new capacities uh and become new compa capacities. And then metaphysics seeks the invariant principles um that make this cosmological process possible. So categories like process, form, value, relation, actual, occasion, eternal object. Um these invariant principles render cosmic history intelligible without freezing it. Now if we conflate metaphysics and cosmology, I think we end up being tempted either to reify patterns into abstract agencies that exist above the material world or we end up reducing agency to an illusion emerging from brute mechanism. I think Levan is correct to resist the latter and I think process philosophy can help us sidestep the former danger. So to conclude, I think the stakes of all this uh are not merely conceptual. Um they're not merely scientific. They shape how we imagine the future of life itself. If we treat the latent space of adjacent possibilities as a predeterminate reservoir of finished designs, then I worry that all novelty becomes a kind of illusion. Uh if we treat forms as unreal on the other hand reducible to molecular flux then the evident creativity of life dissolves into noise uh contingently selected um by the filter of natural selection which I don't think can get us the uh novel form um or the biological agency that many neodyarwinians assume it can. process philosophy, I think, helps us avoid both of these extremes by offering us an ontology of what I would call participation. Um, what this looks like looks like is an ever multiplying plurality of actual occasions relating to one another through a unified continuum of potential forms guided by a cosmic lure that does not compel but invites compositional intensification. On this picture, law is not the iron rule of a transcendent order, but the sediment of repeated successes or achievements. Form is not a rigid template, but a pattern of definitess available for creative variation. Agency is not an illusion, nor is it a ghostly force beamed in from elsewhere. Agency is the way the universe at every scale feels and responds to its own possibilities. Philosophy then becomes less a search for final explanation than a discipline of attunement to this field. There's no arrival. There's no last word. There's only the humility of beginning again in the middle of things, listening for the rhythms of a living universe. I think Levven's platonic research program in biology is an important chapter in the history of science. It invites us to recognize that the organisms we study are not passive objects but co-authors of the world drawing on a structured value laden morphospace or topos that is itself evolving as they live die and create. So in short cosmogenesis does not obey forms it creates out of them. And I think our task uh as scientists, as philosophers, as human beings is to learn how to participate more consciously in that creative advance. Um thanks for your attention and I welcome uh comments, criticisms uh and alternative suggestions. Thanks.